hey everybody today's episode is brought
to you by our very own
impact theory university enjoy the
episode
[Music]
everybody welcome to another episode of
conversations with tom i'm here with
gadsad
gad welcome to the show man
so good to be with you tom thank you for
inviting me absolutely so i love
your area of expertise this is something
that as
certainly as a business person and as
somebody who now creates content for a
living i think a lot about
which is psychology through the lens of
evolution
and i would love to dive into what i
call the physics of being human so
they're just sort of basic things
that have somehow become somewhat
controversial that i would say are baked
into us
now i i used to really want to believe
is probably the right way of like we are
a total blank slate that there's nothing
hardwired
um and then i read the blank slate by
stephen pinker
and realized okay this isn't quite
accurate um
and so i sort of come down to just
repeating what i hear science say which
is we're about 50
hardwired and 50 malleable um and
one i'd love to know if you agree with
that and if you do what are the parts
that are hardwired
right so this is the old nature nurture
debate and in a sense it's a false
dichotomy and the the the analogy i like
to use here tom is
if i took a bunch of ingredients that
constitute
baking a cake so the baking soda the
flour
the butter the eggs before i bake the
cake you can identify each of the
ingredients separately
once i bake the cake it becomes an
inextricable
melange so if i now told you please
point to the eggs
please point to the sugar you couldn't
and so the reality is
for most phenomena we are an
inextricable mix of both
some more one or the other so my height
is less likely due to socialization
but in this it's also a false dichotomy
for a second reason
because it pits nature versus nurture as
though they're
sort of opposing forces whereas the
reality is
that nurture exists in its form because
of nature
so if you see a socialization pattern
for example how we teach little girls
and little boys to
behave that could certainly be within
the purview of socialization
but to the extent that the exact same
socialization patterns happen
across time periods across cultures
it's because they are supporting
biological imperatives so the nature
nurture
dichotomy is really a false one i heard
you throw out a quote one time i think
you were quoting somebody else but they
said that
genes have culture on a leash or human
nature as culture under
something like that yeah that's
beautiful that's e.o wilson
and so he's basically arguing exactly
that right so yes
there is malleability to use a term that
you you use
at the start of your first question we
we have evolved
behavioral plasticity past plasticity
right
so for example the field of behavioral
ecology
which is an evolutionary based field
actually looks
at cross-cultural differences through an
evolutionary lens so for example
how much spices we use in a particular
culinary tradition
is a manifestation of behavioral
ecological approaches if i live in a
climate that's very hot
where there is greater proliferation of
food pathogens
then i will use a greater amount of
spices as an antimicrobial
solution therefore we've both evolved
similarities across cultures but also
evolve the capacity to change
in adaptive ways so this is why for
example the old
canard of evolutionary psychologists
only look at
human universals is grotesquely false we
recognize that some things are exactly
the same whether i'm peruvian nigerian
or japanese
but there are many things that make us
dissimilar from one another
also for evolutionary reasons yeah that
to me the
the malleability is the area that i'm
i'm super focused on as a human being
like when i think about um and
i think everything ends up becoming an
echo of your beliefs
so when asked what the meaning of life
is i will very
rapidly say to me the meaning of life is
how much of your potential can you
translate into usable skill set
and then can you use that skill set
doing something that matters to you and
matters to the world ideally
which is itself an echo around my belief
that the sort of core fundamental driver
for humans is to
hit a state of neurological pleasure is
probably the wrong word but i'll round
it to fulfillment right you want to be
living a life where you feel fulfilled
you feel alive
and so when you take all of that then i
start saying okay well
regardless of what is sort of hardwired
into me as a person i want to know about
the part that i can change
one of my favorite quotes is you can't
make a
racehorse out of a pig but you can make
a really fast pig
and so i'm always trying to become the
really fast pig in the areas that i care
about
but when i think of myself as a marketer
which is i know where
you and i have a lot of overlap in terms
of your focus
on consumer behavior being driven
through an evolutionary lens
um i start thinking about the parts that
are hardwired and that's where [__] gets
super [__] weird and have you have
you read a book called a billion wicked
thoughts
uh no i i know of it but i've never oh
my god dude i think you're gonna love it
it is
it is so fascinating in terms of
the parts of us that are hardwired i
mean just they're talking
largely between men and women um and i'm
i'm curious
as somebody who's focused at that
intersection of consumer behavior and
evolutionary psychology
what are some of the the universal
drivers
that you see and i'm curious to see how
you'll answer that given the whole egg
in a cake analogy
um and i'm super curious how you well
i can answer it in five minutes or i can
answer it in five hours so let's shoot
for about five to ten minutes
uh so one of the ways that i address
this is i argue that
uh so if you look at for example
maslow's hierarchy of needs which is
sort of the
the the archetypical theory that we see
when we're teaching consumer behavior
let's say at the mba level so
it's a theory of motivation right uh you
know i first have to
uh satisfy the most basic uh needs
and then i go up the hierarchy well
maslow's hierarchy of needs is very nice
but it's actually not rooted in in
necessarily in a clear understanding of
evolutionary theory because the reality
is
we don't always go systematically
through the hierarchy someone could be
living in the ghetto and they're very
very poor and they don't have enough
caloric certainty for their next meal
yet they are willing to dish out 250
dollars for their
you know for their the coolest sneakers
today right
uh and also the idea that the apex of
our sort of
motivational trajectory is
self-actualization is a wonderful idea
but it was rooted in abraham maslow's
humanist
philosophy right this is what i ought to
aspire to be so i should take a vacation
and study the anthropology of the inuits
that would be i'd be self-actualized
the reality though is that we need to
root
motivational theory in an evolutionary
understanding of what makes humans stick
and so i argue in my books at least the
the evolutionary
evolutionary psychology consumer
psychology books that there are four
fundamental
drivers that drive our purpose of
behavior as humans in general and as
consumers in particular and so maybe
i'll i'll discuss each
and then we can take whichever route you
want to go so the first one is the
reproductive module so this is the idea
that many of
our behaviors is linked of course to sex
so when i
purchase a a maserati i am literally
engaging in a homologous behavior to the
peacocking of
the peacock's tale right it's not a
coincidence that
99 of ferrari owners are
men even though there are millions of
women who are millionaires if not
billionaires who can certainly afford
the maserati and the lamborghini and yet
they don't engage in that particular
purchase
so how for example women beautify
themselves
as a function of where they are in their
ovulatory cycle
the fact that strippers get more tips
when they're ovulating is
insane how the [__] are we picking up on
that
so let me actually tell you a story
about that exact study so that study was
conducted by
a good friend of mine jeffrey miller
who's also an evolutionary psychologist
and we were sitting at a conference the
human behavior and evolution conference
this is the premier conference for
evolutionary psychologists and he starts
telling me oh
because he knew i was working on some
menstrual cycle work and he says oh god
i want to tell you about a project we're
working on and then he
tells me about that that you know
tipping
with the the strippers for those of you
who don't know by the way let me just
give you the
final finding when women are in their
ovulatory their fertile phase of their
menstrual cycle this is when they
receive the greatest amount of tips
and so either they are dancing in a more
lascivious manner enticing the men
and or men are picking up those fertile
cues and are asking
those particular women to dance for them
so it could be either mechanisms
but in any case i had been planning on
doing that exact study
with one with my doctoral student who i
ended up doing a lot of this menstrual
work
but jeffrey beat me to that study now
the reality is
we were perfectly suited or well
situated to do the study because
montreal is known as a city
where there is a strip bar on every
second you know street corner really you
know we don't
oh yeah yeah i mean it's gone down a bit
now but certainly
certainly when i was growing up you went
downtown
you know every fifth one every fifth
store was a strip bar
and so anyways so so to go back to my
uh original thing with the four modules
so there's the reproductive module
which speaks to things that we do that
are ultimately fundamentally related to
the sex drive
so this would be sexual selection in
evolutionary theory
then there is the survival module so
that would be related to natural
selection those are
things that we do because they confer
and adapt a survival advantage
so for example so let's link it to
consumer behavior so for example that
you and i
have a gustatory preference we've
evolved taste buds for fatty foods
would be a manifestation of the survival
module now i may prefer
a juicy steak you may prefer chocolate
mousse
so the specific instantiation of that
drive might be different across you and
you and i
but we both prefer chocolate mousse or
steak
than raw celery right yes we do the
survival
we do exactly and and i think i'm a bit
uh
or maybe a lot chunkier than you so some
of us even preferred more than others
so then the so that so that's survival
that's reproductive let's do the last
two
uh kin selection is the mechanism that
explains why i would jump into a river
to save three of my brothers if if
evolution operated at the individual
level
meaning the whole individual then there
should never be an evolutionary
advantage for doing that but once we
recognize that
evolution operates on at the gene level
then to the extent that my brothers on
average share half of my genes with me
if i jump into the river and i die and i
save three brothers
the evolutionary calculus checks out so
then how do we apply this
and say consumer behavior well there are
all sorts of
uh types of investments parental
investments for example that you to your
children
or gift giving to your kin that would be
very well
explained via kin selection so it turns
out another study that i've done
that the the size of the gift that i
give to people
let's say at christmas season is
perfectly modulated by my genetic
relatedness with those people
i give a larger gift to my brother than
i do to my first cousin than i do to my
second cousin
that mechanism even though if it's
subconscious i'm not aware of it
it's already driving the allocation of
my
gift-giving budget and then the first
the fourth mechanism is called
reciprocal altruism
this is the mechanism that explains why
i would jump into the river
to save tom tom is not my kin tom is not
biologically linked to me
well the idea is that a lot of these
behaviors stem from a tit-for-tat
strategy right
and so again here there's all sorts of
behaviors that we engage in as as
consumers that are based on that so when
i invite you on your birthday
uh to a fancy restaurant i do expect
even though i might not enunciate it
that you will reciprocate when it's my
turn and if you don't then that's a
violation of our social bond now from a
classic economic perspective
why don't we just skip this whole ritual
i'm gonna pay a hundred bucks on you
you're gonna pay a hundred bucks for me
we're gonna end up at the same place so
skip the whole thing and let's not
invite each other
well we do it because reciprocal
altruism rituals
is the mechanism that oils is the
lubricant of our social bonds
so to answer you in a i guess five ten
minute version
i argue that much of what we do can be
mapped onto these four
darwinian modules all right that's super
interesting especially in the context of
your new book which is part of the
reason that i wanted to go through that
so the parasitic mind your new book
[__] fascinating
and um as somebody who dude when i say
that i had
zero interest in getting into the
culture wars four years i
avoided it um and then was looking off
my
balcony one night and was literally
watching l.a burn
and you could hear the sirens and
obviously what's going on now is is
really really crazy and you've talked
about the
you of an evolutionary psychologist
who's been warning us for two plus
decades
if only if only gad that that would have
been
wonderful yeah it's it's funny now how
the reason that i started talking about
this is precisely for that reason that
nobody is speaking up about it this has
started to actually scare me for the
first time in my life i'm like whoa hey
civil war may not be inevitable and i
certainly hope that it's not but it's on
the table of options
and that's the part that is very
distressing
you've said that the eighth deadly sin
is cowardice
and that people need to have the
testicular fortitude uh i love that
um oh dude for sure and
and very compelled by it so
given what you just walked us through
like what the [__] is going on with idea
pathogens
how are people getting in the grips of
what
from somebody standing on the outside it
just seems it seems self-defeating
so there are several ways i can go here
the first
natural way to jump from evolutionary
theory to the idea pathogens
story is as an evolutionist one of the
tools that i have in my toolbox or
arsenal is this the field called
comparative psychology
so comparative psychology is the field
that looks
across species for certain homologous
behaviors so for example when i
discussed earlier
me purchasing the maserati is akin to
the peacock showing off his tail
that was a manifestation of comparative
psychology the idea being that we're
ultimately all
connected in the evolutionary tree of
life uh you know the
the bonobo is literally my animal cousin
we share a common ancestor if we go back
enough in the tree of life
and so by studying certain behaviors or
phenomena or morphological features
in other species it can say something
about us so that's the field of
comparative psychology
so because i want to give you kind of
the background of how i develop this
idea of parasitology
so as i was seeing the lunacy unfolding
within the ecosystem of the
universities i started thinking well you
know what can
cause other animals to engage
in perfectly maladaptive ways so now you
see the link of
how i'm going from evolution to idea
pathogens well there is a field called
neuroparasitology so parasitology is the
study of
parasites right now some parasites go
into your gut the tapeworm
neuroparasitology are specifically the
parasites that
go into your brain right and they are
endless incredible examples in the
animal kingdom of such
you know phenomena the one that i always
say because
some people seem somewhat familiar with
it is toxoplasma
gandhi it's a parasite that attacks the
brains of mice
who should be afraid of cats
but when they are parasitized by this
particular brain worm
they lose their innate fear of cats and
they actually become sexually attracted
to the
cat's urine they approach the cat that's
not a very good outcome for a mouse
right
another example of a parasite is one
that attacks
ungulates deer moose elk when they are
parasitized by this by this particular
brain worm
they start one of the behavioral
manifestations they start engaging in
circling behavior so they kind of bob
their head
and they go around in a circle unable to
extricate themselves
from this motor pattern so even if the
looming predators are coming
it's not instantiating their flea
mechanism they're stuck in this
mechanism
and so that's that was my epiphany i
thought okay aha
well humans can certainly be parasitized
by by actual brain worms
but regrettably for us because of our
big brains we can be parasitized by a
second class
of brain worms and i call them idea
pathogens
meaning that they could literally be
dreadful ideas
that can proverbially get us to go
around in the circle
or approach the cat when we should be
running away from the cat
all right one thing i think it it will
behoove us so
the part of the toxo parasite
is the worm itself can only sexually
reproduce in the gut of a cat
so that worm has a reason
to want to instantiate that behavior
right so it's
terrifyingly brilliant in why it's doing
that now it can reproduce asexually
but for whatever reason i certainly
don't understand it prefers to reproduce
sexually so it wants to get into the gut
of a cat so my question is
what is that why the hell are people
grabbing onto ideas where they are
trying to detach themselves from reality
so and this this you just answered the
question i answered it tell me how
yeah i know without knowing so i argue
forgive me did you finish
no no please go go go go so
uh i argue that each of these idea
pathogens
and and we can of course get into the
specifics of these because people might
be saying what do you mean by an idea
pathogen so we'll talk about that
but each of these idea pathogens share
one thing in common so in the same way
that for example
cancer could be very different but it
shares
the mechanism of unchecked cell division
so that's the common thing now the
different associations of cancers might
be very different beasts but they
certainly do
share that commonality well the idea
pathogens
share one commonality and that is the
their desperate desire
to free themselves from the shackles of
reality
why what purpose does it serve
so so it depends if you want to answer
it at the literally at the level of the
idea pathogen or of the the vehicle that
is espousing that [__] which is the
human being
so that so we can we can do it either
way so but let's
let's cover some specific idea pathogens
okay
so the the the top the grand daddy of
all idea pathogens
is post-modernism right because
postmodernism
basically frees us from the shackles of
reality
at the most fundamental epistemological
level there is
no truth by designer by accident
you mean that that pathogen if who
whoever named post-modernism like was it
a philosopher that said hey i've got
this new idea it's post-modernism and it
breaks us
literally saying the words it breaks us
from our connection to reality and
or truth or i forget what you just said
but like the
why at some point this has to like you
buy the ferrari
because it gets you laid i'm trying to
like make the can like
why the [__] would you ever want to be
based on that
my theory now here i'm entering the
domain of
uh i'm i'm surmising i love it the most
i'll take speculation all day
it is speculative but i have pitched it
to a few people
and they said that they think i'm on to
something so the the holy trinity of
bullshitters
post-modernist bullshitters are three
french
postmodernists jacques laconte
jacques de rida and michel foucault
right they're three
fr french from france i i make that
distinction because
montreal is also french but that's
quebec french so these three french
bullshitters
i argue that what drove them to
develop this field
is exactly the getting laid thing right
and let me explain now at first it's
going to sound as though i'm being sort
of hyperbolic but
i really am not i'm walking on campus so
now i'm jacqueline
or jacques and those guys in chemistry
and the neurosciences and in physics
they
seem to be getting a lot of prestige
they're the hot quarterbacks on campus
this sucks i too can engage in
impenetrable pros just like in
mathematics by the way my background is
in mathematics
in mathematics if you don't understand
the language of mathematics
the first line of a paper you're already
out right
they say that in physics it takes maybe
one page before you're lost in
mathematics the first line and you're
gone right
well i want to also be a cool hot
quarterback
so i'm going to start developing
verbiage
prose that is as impenetrable as those
hottie mathematicians
because through my full profundity
i could fool all the morons at princeton
and all the pretty girls
looking at me from the first row into
thinking i'm a deep thinker
so we try it out i engage in an
endless verbiage of [__] that has
absolutely no meaning
literally zero semantic meaning and
guess what people are fawning over me
now how do i have proof of this theory
well and i actually cite this in
the parasitic mind which you i i guess
you have a copy of so you can go back
and check it so john cyril was a is i'm
not sure if he's still alive he's a
famous american philosopher
who was chatting at one point with one
of the holy trinity of bullshitters
michel foucault
and he said to him how come michelle
when i sit down and talk to you in
private
you seem to kind of make sense but when
i
read your stuff i don't understand much
and i mean john cereal is not exactly a
dummy right
and he says oh well i'm paraphrasing
what he said well you know if in france
if you
don't confuse them then they can't
take you seriously aha my theory is
right so it's peacocking
through [__] right it's full
profundity so in the parasitic mind i
give another example
fmri is a methodology that is used for
brain imaging right
functional magnetic resonance imaging
well you could take the exact same paper
that this study has been done by the way
i could take the exact same paper
and i either put somewhere in the paper
just a random gibberish image of of the
brain activation patterns
or not and then i ask people which one
is more serious science
oh the the one with the with the
multi-color image see
right it's for profundity it's what's
called the illusion
of explanatory profundity it sounds
sciencey
so post-modernism sounds impressive by
the way
even my wife when she hears me talk
about it she said you know i feel so
much better having heard this from you
because when i was a student
and i learned post-modernist philosophy
i used to always
attribute my non-understanding to me
being too dumb guess what that's exactly
what the charlatans do
get up in front of the crowd wow them
with obscure [__]
and when they don't understand most
people are charitable so they attribute
the non-understanding
to them being to them not to the guy
selling you [__] yeah
does that give you a very much so if you
can't dazzle them with brilliance
bamboozle them with [__]
so now what's interesting to me though
is that i get that from a guy's
perspective you want to get prestige it
really does get you laid
um but from a female perspective like
when you look at what's going on
now with the social justice warrior and
how much prestige you can get from being
a victim or for calling out a victim or
for
calling out a perpetrator
what what's the game there how how does
prestige function in women
i get it in men but not necessarily in
women so
different possible ways so one of the
ways to stick with the
theme of freedom from reality well
radical feminism frees me from reality
in that it removes the shackles of this
annoying thing called biology
right so it is not true i'm speaking now
as a radical feminist
uh it is not true that there is such a
thing as
innate biological differences only nazi
kkk
members who sleep with their sisters and
have a dog named roscoe would say such a
horrible thing
every single sex difference is due to
social construction
the only reason why ariana grande at 100
pounds
can't bench press as much as bubba who
plays
center for uh the nebraska cornhuskers
is because the parents of baba taught
him through socialization
to play rough and tumble whereas they
told ariana grande
to be sweet and gentle that's the only
thing that led to their different
trajectories so that one can best press
800 pounds and the other one can't lift
a feather so that
frees me from the shackles of reality
by negating something called biology the
trans suffix does the same thing right
sure i have a nine inch penis but guess
what
magic trans i'm now a woman you don't
call me a woman you're a transphobe
bigot
right so it frees me from this thing
called my genitalia by the way
me saying this does not imply and i hate
that i always have to remind people this
me saying this does not imply that i'm
not
massively for transgender rights right
transgender people do exist and it's a
very difficult existence
me saying that does not negate their
experience nor does it condone any
bigotry against them
but it says that in the pursuit of true
social justice
we don't murder truth i can support
a world free of sexism whilst
recognizing
that there are differences between men
and women i could support
transgender rights whilst recognizing
that a 280 pound guy
that used to be called john should not
be competing
with a hundred pound girl because bruh
i'm now a woman
okay so you see the tension yeah here's
the part that i don't understand
and this is when i think about what are
ideas that i want to get across before i
die here
is god maybe the most important to me
skills have utility
what do i mean by that they let you do
things so you close your eyes you
imagine a world that's better than this
one you open your eyes and you have to
actually be able to go out and make that
world come true so i used a big brother
for this little kid and
um he was really small and he wanted to
be in the nba so what do you want to be
when you grow up i want to play in the
nba and i was like okay
are you practicing because if you're not
practicing
basketball like you're you're it's
already stacked against you because i
don't
see huge height in your future and then
on top of that if you're not playing
you're not going to be getting better
so there are people that have been short
that have gotten into the nba but
exactly
zero percent of those people got into
the nba without an
absurd amount of practice and training
and getting better
and by getting better you can go and
compete and you can actually beat people
at things one of the most controversial
posts that i've done in recent memory
was me saying this is a competition
meaning life life is a competition
people flip the [__] out and the reason
they flipped out is not immediately
apparent to me
up but if i were going to surmise it
would be that
there is so much emotional conflict in
having to face that
they have a fixed mindset so when i say
i'm not good enough yet they just would
have to face in their own mind that
they're not good enough full stop
and when i think about hey
if you go develop a skill set you can
actually shape some piece of the world
you can
have an insight you can have a
breakthrough in physics you can solve a
theorem in math you can
like when i think about what physics has
done to our modern world and technology
and gps i mean
being like einstein's relativity theory
gave us the ability to track people with
gps and so you can drive to your
friend's house without getting lost
it's like that that has real utility it
wasn't like just some theoretical thing
that never plays out in the real world
so why do people want to break the bond
like i'm legitimately confused i
actually don't understand so i think i
mean again i think
at the start of your question you you
hit on the answer so social
constructivism is another idea pathogen
right it's the one that says that we're
born with empty minds earlier you
mentioned the blank slate right
so the tabula rasa view not just of the
human mind
but there is kind of a a larger tabula
rasa which is
that we are all born with equal
potentiality
and it is only the mishaps
of our environments that didn't make me
come out to be a top nba player right
well there's something very hopeful
in me thinking that my child has as much
of a chance as
any other child to be the next lionel
messi or the next albert einstein
i want to hang on to that hope therefore
again breaking free from reality in this
case
is a great ego defensive strategy right
i don't want you to tell me
that look based on these morphological
features of your child at 11 the
likelihood of him
becoming the next lionel messi given
that he doesn't have
coordination to catch a ball the size of
his head
is probably not going to happen no by
the way this is what causes by the way
the anti-vaxxers to believe in the you
know all the anti-vaxxer with the autism
stuff right
because it makes a lot more sense for me
as a as a parent
of an autistic child to think that there
was something nefarious in the
environment
that caused my child my child could not
have been
born spoiled he was born perfect just
like any other child
so again in many cases i fully
understand that these idea pathogens
stem from a hopeful place from a noble
place so for example
cultural relativism is another idea
pathogen
it basically says who are you to judge
the
the the rituals of another culture bigot
shut up
right so why do you cut off the
clearances of five-year-old girls
or why do you judge that who are you to
judge right
well again that whole cultural
relativism came from the idea
a hundred years ago from franz boaz who
was the originator of he's an
anthropologist
and then he trained the next many
generations of bullshitters
to argue that there are no such things
as human universals
there is no such thing as biology why
because
biology and the wrong hand could be
misused right
that's why people hate evolutionary
theory right because eugenicists
used evolutionary theory they didn't
right all they said is
let's purify the the gene pool by
you know by uh stopping people from
reproducing but i mean that's
not really evolutionary theory uh the
nazis said hey
it's a struggle between the races it's a
darwinian struggle and hey the jews lost
so who cares if we kill them that's just
darwinian the british social class elita
said hey we're the upper class
you guys are in the lower class if you
die out without health care who cares
that's darwinian that's
that became known as social darwinism so
because a whole bunch of people
a whole bunch of cretans miscreants
misused evolutionary theory
a whole bunch of academics came up with
a new world view that says hey
let's not discuss biology let's build a
new understanding of human beings
so that hopefully we don't have these
but you again in the pursuit
of noble causes you can't murder truth
it'll come back to bite you
so what do we have now we have a hundred
years of social sciences
social scientists are not morons but if
they are inculcated
with the abdication of biology in
explaining economics consumer behavior
sociology anthropology
you end up with edifices that are at
best incomplete knowledge at worst
[__] knowledge and so one of the
things that i do in my scientific work
is say
hey look you can't understand managers
and employees and employers and
consumers
without ever activating
their biology right the
how i behave in the marketplace doesn't
exist
outside my biology it exists because of
my biology so i don't know if i've
watched too long one day but no not at
all but this
so we we as i try to cobble this
together and and i'm just gonna think
out loud and so bear with me and i'll
see if i can connect some of these dots
so one of the most fascinating things
when i think about the physics of being
human and what are the
the universal i will say the universal
drivers of a human
one of them to me seems self-evidently
the need to feel good about yourself
and i know there was a study that showed
the more delusional somebody is
the more likely they are to be happy and
when you think about the ability to
delude yourself
and you think about the natural tendency
towards a fixed mindset
which using carol dweck's definition a
fixed mindset is somebody who believes
their talent and intelligence or fixed
traits
i don't know why but there was another
study
that showed people gravitate towards
natural talent they find it just sexier
just
more appealing and so they took a piece
of music same piece of music same
recording but they told people different
stories about it
either this was a prodigy or this was
somebody who trained for 10 years
and people when you tell them it's a
prodigy they rate the same
performance better than when you tell
them that somebody that trained
so you've got this weird thing where
people have uh
they find natural talent sexy they
believe that their own talents are fixed
and they're we have we all have this
tendency towards self-delusion
and that self-delusion has a survival
basis because you're less likely to
slide towards depression
so now it's like you've got this
terrifying [__] cocktail
of people who have every evolutionary
reason
to buy into ideas that break the bond
to reality and then the the way that
if people are really gaining status by
and i'm not sure that i understand well
enough
that it's mating seems one of the ways
but when you were going through that i
felt like whoa this is the example of
the cake
and now we're trying to point to an egg
because when i think about
and we we have to talk about lebanon and
you living through a real civil war
because when i when i there was just a
dude executed on the streets of portland
now we don't know all the details and so
maybe it ends up not being what it
looks like which it looks like to me
that he was executed for ideological
reasons that it was one side versus the
other
and my thing is i think both sides are
[__] terrifying i don't want people
going
to a side but evolutionarily
you also have an us versus them you
walked us through that with
the whole notion of you're more likely
to give a big gift to your family you're
more likely to jump in the river to save
your brother
like there's but and you also mentioned
that
my value system cowardice right
i'm doing all of i'm putting my whole
[__] company at risk because i'm
suddenly talking about things people are
not using me talking about
and but i do it because i have a value
system that says you can't be a coward
under any [__] circumstance
and so now i find like myself
being leashed you know the the nature of
humans have a value system that values
and drives their behavior i happen to
have decided to value not being a coward
and so you get this crazy mix
which feels like it is pushing us
inextricably towards
conflict because i don't i don't know
what the breaks are
other than the horrors of war that will
back people the [__] off
but at what cost right
uh so many different yeah i'd like to
say
thinking out loud but luckily i guess we
have enough time so we'll we'll
we'll do the stream of consciousness no
problem for your first point
which i want to just add a bit when you
said that uh our capacity for
self-delusion
and how that is linked to depression so
let me add
a fantastic uh finding
to that story because i think your
viewers would appreciate it
so in psychology there's something
called the fundamental attribution error
do i attribute things internally
dispositionally it's due to me being
intelligent
or externally it's due to the exam being
easy
okay so for
the general pattern is that people
attribute successes
internally and failures externally so i
did really well on the exam
well because i'm very smart if i do
poorly i did very poorly on the test
because dr saad is an [__] right so
that turns out to be the healthy way of
viewing life the delusional way
the only group of people who don't
suffer from that attributional style
are depressives and therefore that
speaks to the
chicken or egg question and
unfortunately i don't have the answer to
this because the
debate is still ongoing is it that
people who
start off in the world being more
accurate
about their attribution styles are more
likely to become depressed
or is it that when i'm in the throes of
a clinical depression
i become better self-modulated about the
reality of the world and
and it could be maybe a mix of both so
there is you're exactly right that there
is an evolutionary advan advantage
to walking around with some
self-delusion right i mean i shouldn't
be thinking some of these self-delusions
that come with the idea pathogens those
are just
departures from reason but what we're
talking about is in a sense adaptive
self-delusion so for example there is
actually research that shows that
overconfidence
has adaptive value right i mean i
wouldn't get out of bed to try things
that i need to try
if i don't come with a larger than life
sense of
what i can do right uh the world is not
i want to jump in here
are you are you talking about a sort of
alpha versus beta
this sort of sneaky [__] um thing
where it's
there there are two paths to take
because you said there's an advantage to
being overly confident
but if there's there is an advantage of
being overly confident in that for
example
entrepreneurial pursuits and you're
certainly
someone who has done well as an
entrepreneur uh
there's research that shows that
entrepreneurship is linked to
basal testosterone levels right at the
higher your testosterone level
the more the higher you score on an
entrepreneurial proclivity scale well
why is that because
uh testosterone if you like tracks risk
taking
so to the extent that entrepreneurship
is a
manifestation of risk taking i better
think that i can conquer the world
if i walk around the world sucking my
thumb and hiding in a fetal position in
the corner
watching bridget jones diary while
eating ice cream i'm unlikely to come up
with
twitter and whatever other great
entrepreneurial things right
so there is a some value in being
overconfident in your ability but i want
to talk about a second
adaptive reason why we engage in
self-deception so this is not quite
self-delusion but self-deception and
this comes from
robert trivers who is a phenomenal
evolutionary biologist
who is the guy who came up with the
theory of reciprocal altruism
the one where i explained the fourth
darwinian modules
now i applied in consumer psychology but
the original theory of reciprocal
altruism comes from robert trivis
well he came up with many other amazing
theories one of which is
the evolution of self-deception why are
we so
incredibly adept at bullshitting
ourselves and here the the evolutionary
argument is just
brilliant in its simplicity you ready
you're ready you're strapped i am let's
do it all right here we go
so when you and i are
engaging in an interaction there is
oftentimes
machiavellian intent i'd like to
persuade you i'd like to manipulate you
and you and you have to it's a host
parasite
dynamic as i evolve better strategies to
be duplicitous with you and when i say
me i don't mean god's side i mean
to humans right as i'm trying to
manipulate you through machiavellian
intelligence you have to
evolve the weaponry
to detect my possible duplicity one
possible set of ways by which you can
detect my duplicity
is that there are these micro signatures
when i lie
so for example paul ekman the
psychologist
at university california in san
francisco had a brilliant career as a
psychologist
where he studied all of these universal
facial grimaces right
and then the the police forces and the
military forces would consult with him
to see if they can study well when i'm
interviewing a terrorist or prospective
terrorist can i
depict those micro signatures well when
i'm lying to you
hopefully i can hide those micro
signatures
so that when you're looking at me to
pick up those signatures
you don't see them well what's the best
way for me to make sure
that i don't emit those signals if i
believe the [__] right so jerry
seinfeld
had a great episode where george
castanza this i discussed this in my
first
book the evolutionary basis of
consumption so jerry seinfeld is trying
to learn how to be duplicitous
like uh george costanza and at one point
george constanza looks at jerry and says
to him
remember jerry if you believe it it's
not a lie
and i said aha that's the theory of
robert trivers
which by the way speaks to the fact that
one of the reasons why we love
products of popular culture is precisely
because they say
profoundly important things if you know
how to look for them
about our evolved human nature boy that
was a mouthful
uh that is so interesting
and terrifying and while you were
talking i thought i don't understand
i mean look i i do understand for the
reasons that i i walked us through but
it
what you were saying gives me power
because i'm able to understand humans
better and the more that i can
understand them the more that i can
effectively navigate the world
and so this comes back to another idea
that i really want to get across to
people which is
what is your goal because once you have
a goal and if your goal
is exciting and honorable now you've got
something that you can really give
yourself over to and if it's obviously
honorable it's hopefully lifting people
up
you have a way to judge whether what
you're doing makes sense or not
and when i look at what you refer to
as the lunacy of academia or
some people would call the lunacy of the
left
what i'm trying to figure out is
do they in their own minds have a clear
goal and my guess is
some do and some don't and some most i
would say probably the vast majority
steer by emotions so something makes
them feel some kind of way so let's go
back to
status right so you have this ideology
that lets you
jump on a victim rung somewhere or even
your idea of sort of munchausen syndrome
by proxy
um leveraging the victimhood of others
and by
pointing that out and standing up for
them you're able to sort of get on
you're able to get that feeling of being
noble of
being honorable and so it makes you feel
the way that you want to feel so
i really do believe that to
maximize
it's i have a hard time putting it into
words because if i say pleasure people
are not going to get the right idea
to to get a neurological state that you
would want to
stay in um i
people really should follow their
emotions in that way
okay so i follow my emotions i'm trying
to move towards pleasure i'm trying to
move away from pain
but what i have found is that what gives
you pleasure
and what gives you pain is malleable now
it i really believe what you say that
nature holds the leash over culture and
so all this stuff that i'm talking
that's malleable
it has to be in alignment with the true
nature of a human the physics of being a
human
okay yes how you feel about yourself
when you're by yourself to me is the
ultimate
neurochemical cocktail of importance so
if like
how many billionaires have to commit
suicide before people realize it's not
money it's not status
it is truly do you think you're an
[__] do you think you're a piece of
[__] i've heard you talk about this a
thousand times
you judge every day by putting my head
down on the pillow and
i was just going to give that story i
didn't know you know tell people because
i think it's it's super important
uh so people often ask me because
obviously i have a big platform and
people write to me you know you seem so
happy despite
all the stuff you get and i always tell
them what
guides me if i bring it down to the most
fundamental level i'm
i'm driven by almost a maladaptive
purity ethos
that's shaped by two ideals truth and
freedom
and in the book if you remember i
actually give examples from my life
of how i've instantiated those two
ideals
in very different ways so for example
when i was a soccer player
the way that i instantiated my drive for
freedom is that i played
my best performances was when i played
as the playmaker
the number 10 position where i get to
roam around
looking for spaces to take advantage of
when a coach would
put me with some positional restrictions
you're playing more on the
left side of midfield you have to track
back tom
number eight of the other team it's not
because i was a prima donna and a diva
and you shouldn't tell me what to do
is that once you put restrictions on my
movements
my brain exploded and i couldn't play
anymore because my biggest talent
was to be free and roam around looking
for those spaces those opportunities
and so so to come back so this purity
bubble
which causes me to set a very high bar
of personal conduct makes it such that
at the end of the day
so to to take what you kind of gave part
of the punchline away when i put my head
on
my pillow and i need to feel fully
comfortable within myself
i need to feel as though i did whatever
i could however big it is
or however small it is to fighting for
those ideals if i did i sleep well at
night if i didn't
i'm a fraud who's an insomniac and
therefore
in a sense it's a very punishing and
exacting standard
because this is what causes me to then
be so
hyperactive in everything that i do
because i'm seeing the [__] and the
murder of truth and the rape of truth
coming at me from every direction and if
i don't intervene
then i'm akin to the guy who sees the
woman being raped in the alley
and she's screaming but then i pretend
oh i didn't hear her officer i didn't
hear her if only i would have heard
her i would have intervened that speaks
to that eighth sin
cowardice the problem i think and maybe
you could help me here
is that i can explain the whole
phenomenon
i can get people to understand it i'm
not sure
that you can get people to change the
spots of their leopard
right so some people on the curve are
incredibly courageous some people are
cowardly
and it doesn't matter how many times i
give you the battle cry of march on
soldiers of freedom
if you don't have the testicular
fortitude i'm not sure i can reach you
so what do you think do you think that
everybody is redeemable or
there's just a few that are going to
carry it for everybody yeah not not
everybody is redeemable but if you
um in the sense that there are some
people just truly their brain
is broken or their brain doesn't meet
minimum requirements i don't
think a lot about that so i'll set that
aside and i'll say everybody that meets
minimum requirements
all of them are quote unquote redeemable
so now the question i like to play a
game
no [__] what would it take and i
will try to bring this all back to
what i was saying before sort of how
this
cocktail of things ends up becoming a
problem in that if people define their
goals
and have the kind of self-awareness that
you have that we you know we might be
able to work our way out of this
but if the no [__] answer to
somebody who has a broken
value system and is therefore a coward
let's just take that one since you and i
share that i think it's
it's tremendously important it matters
to me a lot and if i
if i were to die in service of being
brave in the face of fear because i feel
fear like a [__]
but i act despite that fear so if i were
to die in service of that
i would go out being like cool i feel
good about myself if i live to 130
but think i'm a dirtbag that won't help
when i hear
somebody crying that that is just not a
life that i want to live now how do i
know that because i have been a coward
too many times and i know how it makes
me feel right
so this is not somebody who had purity
this is somebody who went through
exactly what i'm going to say is the
punchline for somebody that has a broken
value system
if you said tom this person you have to
save them i'd say cool
you're going to drop us off on a desert
island with me and like
10 [__] die hard navy seal type
[__]
and we're going to have our value system
and we're going to be hardcore and that
person is going to have nowhere to turn
so if they want to get that social
interaction if they want the respect
of their peers they have to become a
hardcore person they have to be the type
of person that will be courageous
because we all physics of being a human
one of the innate things that is [__]
universal
we all want the respect of our peers and
when you get put which is exactly what
happened to me
getting into [__] business and
marrying a woman who was not for play
that put me in this like hey you better
[__] act in a way that's
awe-inspiring that's cool and quite
frankly it better work
and that's the cool thing about business
and where i'm going with this whole
notion of
okay you have a value system you have
clearly defined it now you can figure
out if it works or not
meaning i have a goal i know what it is
i can write it in a single [__]
sentence
if you can't write it in a sentence and
it can't be vague like i want to help
people
that's some seriously vague [__] it has
to be hyper-specific
hyper-specific in a single sentence what
you want to do with your life now you
can run experiments right
literally the scientific method what i
call the physics of progress
i have an obsession with getting to the
root level of things like
where it is no longer reducible so i
have a goal i know what it is i have the
self-awareness to be asking myself
questions about what i want to be able
to write this down
and then i say hey i did this thing did
it actually move me towards it and this
is why the whole notion of
hashtag shut down stem or hashtag um end
science i forget what the and they're so
[__] terrifying to me science must
fall
science must fall thank you that's
beyond terrifying um
is now if we know that we should be
steering towards the things that make us
feel good we should be moving away from
the things that make us feel bad
now we have to be very careful about
what value system
we take on because our value system will
shape
just as it that person on the desert
island who you know 10 months before may
have been absolutely fine being a coward
will now
feel like [__] being a coward because
they want the respect of those people
and when they get it and they're
celebrated that begins to shape
what their neurochemistry will respond
to and i'm convinced you could fmri them
before they went on the island
and after and over here if they if they
get reinforced by being a coward then
they will continue to be that way
and if over here they're getting
celebrated for being um
hardcore brave then now
if you re-transpose them over here they
would at least temporarily
not feel good about being a coward okay
so now if we believe that that it's
natural
that the the mind will respond to what
you were punished for and what you were
celebrated for
most importantly though in your own mind
but that will be shaped
by the group that you're in now it's
like what the [__] have you chosen to
value
because that ultimately will shape what
you feel good about which will
ultimately shape your behavior
because we move towards what makes us
feel good and move away from it because
what
makes us feel bad and now that's where i
feel like we are right now where
people get status because it has been
presented which is the area you
understand far better than i
but it has been presented that
post-modernism is good
um equal outcome is what we should
strive for you're a bigot if you want
anything else
if you try to even bifurcate the world
into male and female with
but all of that to me seems absurd
because i have a different goal
which is the how much of your potential
can you turn into real skill set that
has value for not only you but for
society at large
and that that value for me is defined by
that feeling good but moving towards
goals that are both
exciting to you and honorable to the
world at large
so it's like once you get the sort of
cake baked of how i think
now i become very predictable and so
when i try to work backwards to what
would the cake need to be that would
make the way people are behaving
predictable now it is a it is a weird
[__] cake
and that's sort of where i'm left
yeah so i i can build on what you're
saying so
first earlier you said something like uh
you know understanding those fundamental
rules of behavior or something just
allows me to navigate through the world
better
i that really resonates with me because
when whenever i come into class whether
i'm so i teach at the undergraduate
level i teach at the mba level
masters of science level phd level i
always say the same thing
in this course i'm i'm not going to be
teaching you how to be a better marketer
or a better manager
i'm going to give you the universal key
of human behavior
which you could then go apply it to
understand consumers
to understand your spouses to understand
your
your employees or employers and i always
tell them i i look at them and i say
there will be several of you in this
room
who in the next five years will write me
an email and say the following the exact
same thing that i'm about to say i just
had a fight with my
husband or wife and i now know exactly
why
because of lecture seven where you
talked about the evolution of romantic
jealousy
right so in other words uh
understanding that knowledge is truly
about as actionable as you can get
because
i'm not teaching you what proctor and
gamble should do
in case study number seven i'm giving
you the universal key
mfr okay so thank me
right so that's that's the first thing i
was gonna say then the second thing i i
loved your story about the
the the guy who goes from the island
with the navy's heels and
the cowards right so in a sense these
are two echo chambers right
if you only exist in the echo chamber of
the cowardly bunch
then you never even understand that
there is such a thing as bravery of the
navy seals
now what is the universal principle that
applies to
these two groups so and this is i don't
know how far you i hope you read the
whole book but if you didn't
here's part of it you finished the whole
oh great that's wonderful uh so at one
point i talk about
virtue signaling versus costly signaling
right
and and here i am using a fundamental
principle from evolutionary biology it
is astonishingly profound so now it's
going to apply to those two
groups that you're talking about so
let's do it
when i do hashtags just sweet charlie or
hashtag
free the girls you know for the boko
haram that michelle obama the great
prophet gives us right
she puts a sign with she's sad just read
the girls
right it makes me feel good but in an
incredibly cowardly echo chamber of the
castrati right
because i don't even know the idea that
for a signal to truly be
honest it has to be costly so let's step
back for a second and explain
the evolutionary underpinning of that
story
the peacock evolves its tail
despite the fact that having that tail
reduces
its survivability in other words if if
if it were due to natural selection
which remember natural selection is it
evolves because it gives me a survival
advantage
well the peacock could not have evolved
that tail because it reduces its
survivability
it makes them more visible to predators
it makes it more
easy easy for predators to catch you
because you can't take flight
when you have such a massive tail but if
you recognize that there is a dual
process of sexual selection
which basically says that i need to
first survive
but then i need to find the mate who's
willing to extend their genes with me
it's a
life is a two-stage game i can survive
all you want
if i don't mate it's all over right so
the second step
is that tail evolves because of
recurring female mate choice
that chooses tails that are
ostentatiously big
that have iridescent coloring that have
these big patterns and so on
therefore now why would that evolve well
because the female
the p hen has to choose between a bunch
of suitors
each of these suitors is gonna say to
her hey hey choose me have sex with me
i'm the real deal
so she faces a problem now a conundrum
how do i know the fakers
from the real guys the imitators from
the true guys
well the signal that they emit has to be
so costly that it handicaps them
meaning that by me having that signal
i'm saying hey look sweetie
despite the fact that i've got the
signal that's very costly
i'm still standing here i must be the
guy that you should be mating with
now how do i apply this in the in the
human in the human context
well if you take rights of passage
around the world
let's say boy specific passages it's
never
if you do 10 push-ups you're now a
warrior
and you could mate with all the hot
girls because guess what
almost everybody in that tribe could
emit that signal we could all do the ten
percent but
if as happens in the truck in the
vanuatu tribe
in the south pacific i have to go up an
80 to 100 foot uh platform you have to
time
vine ropes to my feet and i have to jump
off
head first and it stops my brain
splattering
a few inches from the floor that's a
costly signal
only the guys with real big ones can
actually do that
so we're quickly gonna assort the riff
raff
from the guys that i should be having
sex with if i'm if i'm a hot
woman in that tribe therefore for the
signal to be honest
it has to be handicapping therefore it
must be costly
now how do we apply this to all the
social justice stuff
making my hair red and putting a uh
mouth what is it called the fish mouth
fish my face
duck face thank you i'm mixing up the
animals
putting the duck face with the cool
glasses the rim glasses and going just
sweet charlie
you know how much costly signaling it
has zero
but if you're rife by the badawi who is
the guy who is currently in prison in
saudi arabia
who was flogged who is in prison for 10
years because he criticized
the saudi regime while living as a
blogger
in saudi arabia whoa
that's big balls right by the way i'm
good friends with
his whole family they live close here to
montreal
so when i tell people activate your
inner honey badger that's exactly what
i'm saying if you truly want to go at
the end of the night
feeling good about yourself putting
hashtag and changing the flag
to the france you're just a fraud and
all the navy seals
know that you're a fraud maybe your
pick-haired friends think you're
impressive
but the greater world knows that you're
a fraud why don't you join the true
brave
and actually speak out against female
genital mutilation
mutilation in the middle east that's a
costly signal
i used to i'll tell you just one quick
other story uh tom
about costly signaling about three years
ago
i had received a gigantic amount of
death threats it was just
completely out of control and i'd always
been someone sorry i said good
times yeah good times and so i had to
walk
into university and check in with
security
they would walk with me to my class
jesus and then
and then the door would be locked in
such a way that students could
leave whenever they wanted but if they
wanted to come back
in it was locked i would have to let
them in right and that
lasted for you know that one semester
the university came with me they sent an
hr
person with me and we went to the
montreal police
not the campus police the munch the
police to file a report
and i started developing symptoms i had
never experienced this
of not i'm anxious like real i mean
clinical things because i would walk
into campus
i would say goodbye to my wife and i
wouldn't know
who's gonna come at me from which
direction and if i'm gonna make it back
into the car
that afternoon and then when i would get
back to the car
i would literally have this incredible
weight off my shoulder
i live for another week to the next
week's lecture now
thankfully eventually nothing happened
and those
why were you getting death threats
for all sorts of reasons but in that i
mean there was there are many things
first of all i
criticize islam i criticize you know
every single sacred cow that you could
think of that can get
people to be riled up against you i
criticize
that's costly signaling right when you
take a guy who's very mellow
who becomes you know i used to have like
a uh
i used to think about you know if i go
into the elevator
and there are four guys in there how can
i protect myself
these were all my thoughts i'm a
professor in the 21st century
in montreal canada i don't know who's
coming at me when they
and a lot of it was the death threats
were like jew stuff so
you know we're gonna boil you last jew
we're gonna kill you this way jew
this way juju all kinds of stuff so i
didn't even know if there were
some of them where they were neo-nazis
whether they were islamists whether
but it was coming at me fast and furious
some of it was due to the fact that
at one point jordan peterson and i were
going to speak at an event which was
shut down
one of the people who was going to be at
that event was a woman who
was somewhat contentious and the
organizer at the event when they
reorganized the event decided to not
invite her because it was a private
event that she didn't want to take on uh
and so all the neo-nazis sympathizers
that liked that particular journalist
argued that it's the diabolical jew who
had
uh stopped her from coming to the event
which was absolutely not the case right
i was just one of the speakers
i had nothing to do with whether she
came or not the organizer asked me if
she should be invited i
offered her my opinion i gave her the
pros and cons and that was it
but a lot of people were very very upset
by it so anyways all this to say
is that that's costly signaling now it's
not as costly signaling as raj badawi
who's doing it from saudi arabia right
so i was asked at that event when it was
rescheduled
you know who would i consider to be my
heroes and i said
every single person in the middle east
who's speaking out
in the way that i do that's my hero
because at worst i could be canceled i
mean as long as they don't kill me
they can't they're gonna come after me
on twitter come after me
but these people are putting their lives
on the line and so
i hope i've given you a good sense
between the difference between those two
ecosystems that you were talking about
earlier right you have and
and i want to get back to um rituals
coming-of-age rituals are really
important to me but first i think right
now
i'm putting you in context i didn't know
this about you until i started
reading your book and researching you
that you actually
lived through a civil war and um
i think part of why people are so
like they're downplaying the violence is
that that's happening here in the u.s
is because it's it's been so long since
we had violence on our own streets
and outside of obviously um sort of high
crime areas so the average person has
not
experienced that kind of violence you
hear rogan say a lot people don't
understand they've never seen
real violence up close and they don't
know how terrifying it is
um walk me through that because
what what is here's what's here's what i
would love for you to focus on
is every human in my estimation
every human is capable of the kind of
like
cruelty and dehumanization of other
people to the point where they would
kill them
that you lived through and
growing up things like that were a
middle eastern problem they were not an
american problem and so even i not
realizing i had sort of all these
just sort of base assumptions running in
the background of my mind
that i would never happen in the west
and so to see
like where we're going is like
it's it's very unnerving so
how in lebanon do people end up deciding
they want to kill each other
uh so in chapter one of the parasitic
mind precisely because i wanted to give
people the personal narrative
of what led me to become the
parasitologist of the human mind that i
am
part of it comes from a personal
narrative right i mean part of it is yes
i'm a professor of 26 years i see the
ecosystem of the lunacy every day
but as i explained in that chapter i
faced two great wars as you so aptly
summarized there's the the great war on
reason at the universities
but there is the civil war in lebanon
which shaped my childhood so i grew up
for
the viewers who don't know uh as part of
the last wave
of lebanese jews not
druze is different jews j-e-w-s
jewish so we were part of the last group
of lebanese jews who had
doggedly remained in our homeland yes
lebanon is our homeland not
israel lebanon right jews were in
lebanon way before they were
anything else in that region but anyways
so uh
we were very well enmeshed in the
society
but it was always clear that we were
jews shh don't
don't wear the star of david too big be
quiet okay so we will tolerate you
until the day that we won't tolerate you
that's sort of the history of
uh jews in all those areas right there
were iraqi jews there were syrian jews
there were yemeni jews they were
egyptian jews
and now there are no such jews and so
when people say things like
but why do you say it was bad i mean you
live there right and i always answer
the guy was walking perfectly until he
had the heart attack
right so we were all perfectly fine
until we had to really sprint hard
so that our head how sudden is that
because that that's what i'm
i'm trying to bring that into a context
i'm not an alarmist i'm actually a
wildly optimistic person
so it's it's even been unnerving to me
how much this has gone like
oh i could actually see this becoming
something truly problematic
and i worry that people are lulled into
i think brett weinstein said because it
is rare people
confuse it with impossible and
how how fast did it spill over yeah
there's an arabic expression that
says don't don't ask the doctor ask the
one who's been through it
so with all due respect to brett
weinstein
he's speaking in platonic ideals no he i
think he's saying the same thing you're
saying which is
that people get confused you don't see
it very often so you think it'll never
happen and he's saying it really could
happen
well i i have been predicting and people
thought that i was being hyperbolic
right i mean i'm kind of exaggerating
i'm embellishing for
for you know for effect i've been saying
look
there will be civil war in the west
in exactly the same way that happened
lebanon but you have to have a longer
term view
it's not 12 years it's not 15. it's 12
years it's 50 years it's 100 years it's
500 years
but if you get rid of the universal
first principles
that inoculate you against the natural
inclination of tribalism
you will have lebanon i can't tell you
what's the date it could be in 327 years
it could be in 33 years but it will
happen because what you're effectively
doing is you are eradicating
this unique protective belt that we were
able to create in the west
what is that protective what are those
first principles
well so for example the idea of
individual dignity
individual freedom that comes enshrined
within classical liberalism
is is one of the great virtues of the
enlightenment
and of the west right it basically says
i am first
got sad before i am a lebanese jew
lebanese jew is one attribute within my
personhood but when i present myself to
you i am god sad
number one full stop i'm not lebanese
jew i am
god sad right well so when we all
are individual elements
of a greater whole then i'm no longer
asian american
i'm no longer muslim american i am
american so for example i am canadian
right
i love canada canada gave me the
opportunity
to free a [__] free myself or escape
a [__] and come and live my life
here in dignity
therefore i support canada even more
than being jewish
why because canada is the place again so
in other words
that already that when you don't do the
hyphenation [__]
that is one layer of protection right it
basically says
i'm american i'm canadian now what does
it mean to be american
it means that you should support certain
fundamental ideals
blind justice so like uh lady justice
being blind also for example i
argue and i'll come back to my lebanese
experience because it's
it's worth explaining the whole story
but i have drawn an analogy
it's not even an analogy it's a direct
comparison between
sharia law and progressive
logic how sharia allah one of the
fundamental tenets of islamic law
islamic jurisprudence is that the
crime that happens the punishment that
is meted out
is a function of the identity of the
perpetrator
and the victim as a matter of fact it is
enshrined in sharia law
where you give like a sliding scale
table
it's a muslim man who kills a jewish man
that's the penalty if it's a muslim this
right okay
well what does it's relative
it's right so for example oh i mean
literally one-third
one-fifth this penalty is one it's
completely based on your identity
gee i wonder if there's a thing called
identity
politics that is completely that right
so
what does the progressive stack say you
are transgender person of color to the
front of the line you go please
sir or madam you're a white male
heterosexual shut
the hell up you stupid piece of [__] you
are an oppressor
right so again it enshrines
within the ethos of our society that
we're all equal but to varying degrees
of equal
guess what i escaped that [__] it's
called the middle east
and now under the cloak under the robe
of progressive mindset
i am replicating that idiocy
so identity politics is a
cancer to human dignity it is grotesque
right so now let's go back to lebanon so
i grew up in lebanon
i was born in 1964. i always knew that
we are
different and that you know we're jewish
be quiet
they would always be little s scrimmage
like
not big things but uh well actually
pretty big things i
i describe a story where i'm sitting in
class in elementary school and the
teacher says
this is before the war yeah are you do
you know what yeah i'm going
crazy well this by the way is called
tuesday as a lebanese jew okay so i'm
sitting in class
and the teacher says this is before the
civil war civil war did not break out so
this is
pre-heart attack nothing is happening
right
but that's how you normalize hate that's
or to use the term of the bullshitters
of today
that's how you other this is othering on
hypersteroid right
so the teacher says please stand up kids
each at it one at a time
and tell us what you want to be when you
grow up oh i want to be a soccer player
teacher i want to be a police officer
and so on
and one kid gets up i still have his
photo in
my class photo i know exactly which kid
it is and he says oh when i grow up
i want to be a jew killer and everybody
laughs and smiles right
that's a lot more than misgendering
someone
right but by the way that was everywhere
even intolerant modern pluralistic
lebanon
where we weren't being decapitated every
day you always knew
that the anti-semitism was going to
break out somewhere
the politician would say how evil the
jews are oh my aunt just had diabetes
the [__] jews it's sunny outside the
jews
it's raining outside the jews not
israelis
the jews the diabolical jews so so the
reason why i said we were part of the
last group of jews
is because the writing becomes on the
wall like you see what's happening
so there's an exodus there's a slow
exodus of jews and we were part of the
last few that had remained
doggedly because my parents you know
were from a prominent family we were
well entrenched we had
a lot of connections and lebanon is a
beautiful country
until it no longer is and when it no
longer is
you better hightail your ass out of
there quickly because there's a
whole lineup of people who are willing
to
decapitate your head now people will
write to me sometimes they say well you
know you're not the only one who
suffered
violence of course not but there is
something unique
about being jewish in the middle east in
an arabic country
so for example i discuss uh
a phenomenon in lebanon where uh you're
in arabic you say how we
your your there's an internal passport
that
you let's say if the policeman stops you
and says show me your id
it's kind of like a passport but
internally and on that
internal id card it's written your
religion
because everything in the middle east is
through the prism
of your tribal ever explained
like why so hey here's why we put
everybody's religion
on the document it
that's just the way society is
unquestioned
it's just unquestioned as a matter of
fact within the constitution of i don't
know if it has changed since
my days in lebanon but you know the
president has to be of this religion the
prime minister has to be of that
religion
there has to be a certain number of
seats in parliament
to each religion so again imagine how to
the typical western mind that sounds
insane
but that's exactly what we are
enshrining now in our identity politics
we celebrate someone because they're the
first muslim
american in congress i don't give a [__]
that they're muslim i i've never
thought about oh uh adam schiff i don't
know is he jewish
i don't know do you know okay let's
let's go with he's jewish
oh my god i am so excited that adam
chiff
schiff is a jew i don't give a [__] i
despise adam schiff
because he's a [__] and that he is
jewish or not is completely immaterial
to my thinking
but if you are parasitized by identity
politics then you would say oh my god
i'm so excited that they are
you know bernie sanders he could be
president and he's a jew
how exciting is that because i'm also a
jew jew and jew
no bernie sanders to me is an executable
cretan who's a [__]
and the fact that he is jewish is
completely immaterial to my calculus
so the best advice i could offer
westerners
is don't succumb to identity politics
you think it's
inclusive and so on it is a cancer that
will metastasize
into replicating beirut lebanon all
right so there's a few things in there
that um
i want to go down a little bit farther
um so
first of all did you said in the book
that
and i couldn't tell if you were saying
it had actually been put into law or if
there was just a form or something that
had it
but that people have to put what their
pronouns are
is that you mean no no in canada
no oh no so in no so
i was described so i don't know which
specific part you're talking about but
uh i'll give you the background to how i
first came across the gender the
gendering stuff
it was at a talk that i gave in like a
real hotbed of [__] uh
wellesley college i mean you want to
talk about
you know hyper steroid of red-haired
social justice warriors
it's wellesley college right ultra super
privileged kids
paying 10 million dollars a semester in
a super posh school outside of boston
but complaining about the ills of the
west okay so i went there surprisingly
because actually the guy who invited me
was kind of open to you know my
positions
and i think it was called the freedom
project and i was invited to speak about
you know how the thought police is
limiting freedom of expression on
campuses this is many years ago so i was
way before it was cool to do this and
i so i give my whole lecture and after
students and faculty stayed back for an
extended you know q a period
and one student came up to me and said
okay thank you professor sad this was
great
but don't you think that it makes
perfect sense
that professors should be polling
students at the start of every class
about their gender pronouns and so
i then answered so we we went back and
forth and usually one of the ways that
you can
test someone's ideas is to take what's
called the boundary condition
push their logic to the extreme to see
if it makes so i said okay
so let me ask you this if i were a
receptionist
at a uh ob gyn a gynecologist office
and the patients come in should i be
as good practice be asking them
what their gender pronouns are or gender
identity
or should i presume that if they walk
into that no no but that's an extreme
example
i said no no you have to have universal
principles
is the principle that every interaction
throughout society should be predicated
on
me asking you what your gender identity
is
or has it served us well through our
evolutionary history
to presume that based on certain
morphological features
i can quickly categorize you as male or
female knowing that there's a minuscule
minority of people
who do have transgender issues and if
you're a sensitive person you will
accommodate them
but should we have a machine gun
strategy where we ask everybody would we
not be wasting a lot of time
in doing so of course she couldn't
answer me a few years later
i appear in front of the canadian senate
along with jordan peterson
on separate days to speak about
bill c-16 which was the bill
that was trying to incorporate gender
identity and gender expression
within the rubric of hate crimes and
again i was saying
of course i'm against bigotry but let's
be careful about the tyranny of the
minority
and let's be careful about the
proverbial slippery slope
and i quoted harvard university
that specifically had stated that
warning your gender identity can
change on a daily basis
they weren't being facetious they
weren't being satirical
they weren't being hyperbolic they were
saying that you're
so then i said well how would you how
would we manage that i mean
literally i would take a poll so that
tom monday's xer
tuesday is he wednesday right but that's
the kind of lunacy that has taken grip
so
i don't know if i've answered your
question so i'm not saying that you have
to fill a form
but this is the background of how i got
involved in the gender pronoun i may
have misread something in your book but
you were talking about bill c-16 and you
and jordan peterson both warned
look this this thing becomes problematic
because you're compelling speech like
it isn't and jordan has obviously spoken
famously to this it isn't
even that i'm unwilling to grant
somebody's request if it's a sincere
request and they're not trying to
weaponize it or whatever it's it's that
you're telling me how i have to be and
so when you were talking about
the fact that your id says your religion
in lebanon
flash forward and that's going to be
used at a checkpoint to
kill you it's like that's where i go oh
guys like
i i it really pains me it really pains
me that
truly profound wisdom gets repeated so
often it becomes cliche
but like slippery slope that's one of
those like
really really take that in and be able
to
extrapolate we're here today and maybe
that doesn't scare anybody
but like you said take it to the
boundary condition and
somewhere along that way oftentimes
things get
really scary and people's either
unwillingness to do that or
they have a program that's running that
tells them that it won't escalate to
that
or that yes they are legitimately they
understand baby steps baby steps to the
back of the bus
and that's exactly how they're going to
sort of slowly walk you down that garden
path
so yeah just when you were telling the
story like real-life civil war breaking
out
as an american kid of the 80s it just
seemed
fake it seemed like it was happening to
uh
another thing like that it wasn't it was
so
the middle east and the notion of
terrorism and the notion of civil wars
it was either the past
or it was some so distant place it might
as well have been a different planet
and so i never had to like really wrap
my mind around
that escalation where it leads to
killing
so they're they're just going back to
the reason i'm so fascinated by
evolutionary biology evolutionary
psychology behaviorism all of it
is it helps you navigate the world
more effectively and one just like
putting it on yourself so
my particular bent which until as far as
i can tell like
six months a year ago was just
non-controversial
but has now become like crazy
controversial is
just own it yourself entirely you think
about you control you worry about you
you can't control anybody else i would
have handed anybody
the book man search for meaning by
viktor frankl dude's in a concentration
camp
and it's like hey you still get to
control how you react
think feel all of that so it's like if
that guy in that situation is telling
you you still have some agency
trust me when i say you have agency so
it's like i've always come at it from
that perspective of you get to control
you
you get to control how you think react
you take ownership of your own life
and now it's like if you take ownership
for your own life and you're trying to
navigate this world
well you need to really understand what
you were like you need to understand
what other people are like
and by looking at that and going oh cool
humans are susceptible to idea viruses
okay tom you better [__] pay really
close attention
to whether you've gotten an idea virus
so when i look at the other side
and i say they have entrenched
themselves
in in a vacuum like they only an echo
chamber they only hear what they want to
hear
so [__] don't let yourself do that right
don't pick a side
try to always judge everything by its
merits you know what your goal is is it
moving you towards your goal or away
from your goal
cool judge things by that and so when
you
are looking at how people behave so that
you can
look at yourself and make sure that you
don't fall prey to things that aren't
useful that becomes
i would say very advantageous so when i
extrapolate where we are today out to
lebanon and people
actually being killed at checkpoints and
you've said that you know all civil wars
are judged by the brutality of the
lebanese civil war
and you go that's that's today like when
i tell people
mao's [__] china was in the 60s man
like
that that was not some far-removed thing
that happened in the 1600s
that should happen basically now it
happened in my parents lifetime
i missed it by 10 years so it's like
the the human that we all are today is
susceptible to all of this
like really scary [__] and how we begin
to recognize it in ourselves
is the key to me and
recognizing that putting your religion
on your id is problematic
seems very important but it it requires
people to
see themselves as a potential
perpetrator which i don't know
that people do they they just see the
the justice
of their stance
but by the way uh the again to look for
sort of
universal phenomena that explain
manifestations of things
in different ways the way that you
dehumanize jews in the middle east
is the way you dehumanize republicans
within the ecosystem of academia
now the end outcome is not the same in
one case
we take you to the ditch and we shoot
you in the other case
maybe we emob you or we don't give you a
job as a professor because you
apparently said something nice about
trump but the mechanisms are the same
those others are disgusting
they're immoral they're diabolical so
now
when people see me commenting again
i think being canadian gives me a layer
of protection because i could always
remind people
that i don't have literally a dog in the
in the fight
because i don't care really i mean yes
canada is linked to the us
but i'm not what i am indignant about
are those more universal phenomena that
i see and what i see
because i am in the ecosystem of
academia
and since academia is 95 to 99
leftist bullshitters what ends up
happening is
i criticize the left because that's the
disease that i see
that doesn't mean that the right doesn't
say stupid [__] right
it doesn't mean that the example i
always give is if
a hick rip up to kind of take a
stereotypical archetype
if a hick republican senator says that
evolution is a hoax
then i would also be saying what an
idiot but the reality is that the idea
pathogens that i speak of
are wholly due to academic left
so this is like saying if i am a
diabetes
physician someone comes to me and says
but
bruh what about melanoma why are you
such an [__]
why don't you talk about melanoma well
because i'm not a dermatologist
i am a endocrinologist right so
what the diseases that i see are
wholly due to the left the
dehumanization of the other that i see
are strictly due to from the left why
because i live in academia
so i see my highfalutin
cognac sipping pipe smoking
ivory tower dwelling friends look at
those
disgusting people all 60 million of them
all of whom voted for donald trump not
one of whom
had any valuable reason to vote for
for trump they were all just race rabid
racist
now this is not some idiot who's saying
this these are people that if i said
their names to you now
you would say yeah that's true he did
say that that makes me indignant
how could you be so intelligent on so
many other things
but yet you become exactly the person
who is
parasitized by the same [__]
tribalism that i ran away from in
lebanon
so when people see me quote defending
trump
i'm not at all defending trump i'm
defending
a higher ideal people in a democracy
are going to have varying opinions
very reasonable people there are very
compelling reasons why you might like
biden
and i see them but there are also very
compelling reasons
why you might like trump and i also see
them be a bit
nuanced [__] stop being such a partisan
hack right so again that's where i'm
coming from
but because most of my interventions
then seem to be
i'm trying to modulate the left that
makes people think that i am a
surrogate for trump i'm getting paid by
trump in my home in montreal
i'm not i don't care about trump either
way but i can tell you i don't know if
you want to go there
i can list you 12 reasons 20 reasons
why perfectly rational people would
prefer trump over
clinton or over biden so you see what i
mean i do and and
here's here's how to your point about
being nuanced here's how i think about
this stuff so
i am i have my entire life i've been
apolitical
and um partly because of the expertise
thing
it's like i you can only be an expert in
so many things and i just had
a passion that was leading me in a
direction and i've chased that and it's
been absolutely thrilling and sort of
the joyride of my life
and now only because i sense danger like
i won't say existential we'll get to the
other side of it
and maybe that's me being a fool but i
don't see it as an existential risk to
humanity maybe
to the west on a long enough timeline
like you said but i'm more just like
the the game we're playing has an
outcome that i don't
that doesn't match with my goals right
so i have clearly defined goals and so i
just weigh everything against whether it
actually moves us towards that goal
i have the purview of business so it's
like
there are cut and dry answers as to
whether something's moving you towards
your goal or not like you
if you're specific enough in where
you're going and you're
able to look at the data you can just
say yes i'm making progress or no i'm
not making progress
and so when i run the thought experiment
which i think is very important for
people to get good at so you don't have
to
do really unlikely experiments to be
successful and that they will
almost certainly not move you towards
your goal in a meaningful way
so just sort of thinking through that
when i think through
this hardcore division of right versus
left
just to keep an american context
it doesn't make sense like it it won't
lead you to
what i'll say is a better world if
anything first it leads you to violence
but the reason that people do it is
because
one us another so we have that innate
biology to
want to be on a team to get tremendous
emotional reinforcement
from being on a team and just to bring
this back to what i was saying earlier
i think that's it's good and right to
follow the things that make you feel
good
if you're very very very careful about
what you have
constructed to make you feel good and
but now that's been hijacked parasitized
use your words
and but you have this biology that's
pushing you to be on a team
and then if you identify something as an
existential risk which is what freaks me
out on the left and the right
they both think the other side is this
existential risk and that they have to
be stopped
and so it's like yo i see how this
becomes violent really fast
and what people have to do is talk
themselves off that ledge and say
i have to find love for the people
on the opposite side of the aisle like
you you need to
as a and and this is where i guess we we
just
i don't share a goal with other people
and so my goal would be
something that uplifts everybody now
thomas soul i think understands this
better than anybody there are trade-offs
nothing is a utopia
it's it's all a trade-off and so yes
what i would present is is a pretty
traditional capitalistic view which i
don't think will surprise
anybody given my life trajectory um but
because
because i didn't start with money
my parents weren't wealthy people they
didn't teach me to be an entrepreneur
they didn't give me a leg up in that way
in my sort of early to
middle late-ish 20s i i was
at one point i was on um unemployment
because i had gotten fired
and i wasn't able to pay rent and then
for a long time even after that i would
have to juggle bills pay one bill this
month and another another month
and then by learning certain skills i
was able to completely change my life
it is a gift that i want to give to
other people in the viktor frankl way of
you control
a some of your destiny you can't
completely bend the world to your will
and i trust me when i say i lament that
i don't have a level of intelligence
that i deem
awe-inspiring but i've got enough that i
can sort of function in and
and you know do things in the world um
so as i go through and
and think about okay this is my goal
i know that we have to meet in the
middle otherwise it does move towards
hatred certainly we're already at hatred
and could lead to violence because
of people's inclination towards
villainizing the other side
and then intentionally or
unintentionally dehumanizing the other
side
and then feeling the other side
represents an existential risk and
all of this in context were i don't know
maybe seven days out from the
guy that was shot um in in portland just
literally [__] gunned down and look
we
we will find out what is true and we
don't yet know what is true
but on the tape you hear them say here
he is or here's one of them or or
something come get him or something it
was all around we have found
the other team and then bang bang and
he's dead i mean it's just like
whoa this is where we're at in you know
like you said
a pluralistic western advanced modern
society
and yet we're seeing the beginnings of
this and
i don't know if you have an insight into
the what what is true about human nature
that will allow us to help people find
love for the other side wow that's if
if i can solve this one i need to book
my ticket to stockholm real quickly for
the nobel prize
and i would have really earned it
instead of nobel prophet
barack obama who flashed his brilliant
smile to win that nobel prize
but anyways uh i'm gonna actually try to
answer that question using
the language that you've been using sort
of there's a goal and how can i
meet it and is there a trajectory for me
to get to it am i going away from it or
towards it
let's suppose i start with a universal
principle
presumption of innocence is a
non-negotiable
right now i see the brett kavanaugh
story
where he is a gang rapist going
up and down the eastern seaboard
stopping at every neighborhood
gang raping tons of women with his uh
marauding gang
of uh you know uh lapel wearing
guys many of my highfalutin
very very smart colleagues said
it just feels like it's true it's got to
be true
and if there is enough of it there this
is not a courtroom
this is just a job interview then should
we not
so what you're saying [__] is that
presumption of innocence is a malleable
objective sometimes it applies other
times it doesn't
as a function of my tribal
quest right this is what i talk about in
the book very briefly i talk about the
tension between
deontological ethics and
consequentialist ethics
again my purity bubble says no can you
define those i don't know that everybody
will know the difference
sure so deontological statement would be
it is always wrong to lie deontological
absolute
consequentialist would be if your wife
asks you do i look fat in those genes
you want to have a long marriage you say
absolutely not sweetie i've never seen
you look as good as this
that's a consequentialist ethics at
least when it comes to this the reality
is that you can't be you can't have the
disposition of deontological ethics for
everything and you can't be a
consequentialist for everything if
you're a consequentialist for everything
you are post-modernist if you are
deontological for everything
you're the taliban the reality is we are
a mix of those
what matters is where you activate
which of those two orientations well
when it comes to earlier i talked about
the protective belt of the west and you
said give me an example of that and i
said
you know don't succumb to identity
politics well blind justice
is one presumption of innocence is one
it serves a society well to
absolutely have a deontological
perspective on these
it's non-negotiable it's not maybe
it's not gray it's not brett kavanaugh
it's not
if the the court tips towards
republicans
then we need to get rid of him then
you're an [__]
you're just a taliban in training you're
not a true classical liberal
you follow so all of my highfalutin
friends
are just the taliban their ideological
taliban with
again this is coming from a canadian i
don't care about brett kavanaugh
i have no dog in the makeup of the
us supreme court i literally couldn't
care less about any of that
except i really care about the universal
principle
and when i see some [__] who i know
personally
go on twitter and violate all that he
disgusts me
he repulses me he's no different than
the child
at eight years old or nine who said when
i grow up i want to kill
the jews you're the same [__] except
you don't kill the jews
you killed the truth god damn i should
be emperor of the world man
[__] it's unbelievable yeah it's it's uh
obviously i take that as tongue-in-cheek
but that's
that becomes the problem right like
everybody thinks no no man i got this
like um communism would be amazing if it
wasn't for
stalin um and if it's practiced right
communism is beautiful right
so that that's where it's like oh man
you've gotta
you need to build mechanisms or my what
i do in my own life is this i build
mechanisms to protect against
me because i view myself at all times as
a potential problem
and so it's like because of i don't
think that our human wiring
it's the blind watchmaker right so you
get the you get oh god i forget the name
of the nerve that like runs [__] all
the way down and then back up around
your esophagus and it's like absolute
madness
because of evolutionarily that made
sense because it's sort of these really
small incremental
changes but you would never design it
that way and so when i think about okay
i have all of these
sort of matrix-like beliefs running in
my mind many of them are unquestioned i
don't even realize they're there
but they're allowing me to move through
the world and so because i know that i
have all this evolutionary pressure
making me pursue certain things and not
others
i'm like oh i'm a potential problem were
i too meaning
that that my own movements will move me
away from my own stated goals
so it's like okay cool i need to check
myself at all times
against that but that looks great
humility right
i mean it's it's incredibly laudable
that you do that but i
i think you'll probably agree that it's
terribly rare right because it takes
humility first epistemic humility i
don't know everything i need to always
check within myself
but it also takes humility in terms of
your ability to engage in introspection
so
that which you are saying is sort of a
natural state
regrettably most people don't have that
humility so here here's what
we can foster it in everybody can we
foster it i am not talented enough
yet to foster it in everybody but i will
say
if if people can recognize i do that
purely out of selfishness
then my hope is that people will embrace
it because
so i've had an email address for a very
long time
that is basically the notion of
attaining power and when i would tell
people that they would
get grossed out and it never occurred to
me that power was an ugly word
so i was like well let me define power
power is the ability to close your eyes
imagine a world better than this one
open your eyes gain the skill set to
actually make that world come true
and that to me is is the human
experience you're
hopefully doing something honorable like
you're doing something that's awesome
and i will define awesome as it uplifts
everybody as much as possible everything
is a trade-off
not everybody will be able to be
uplifted there's no such thing as a
utopia
but you're creating a playing field
where equal opportunity is how i would
round it
so it's like you're giving everybody a
shot now some people
elon musk is more successful than i am
and almost certainly always will be
because he's a lot [__] smarter than
i am
and it's like that that's just the
reality right and so again you can't
make a racehorse out of a pig
i'm perfectly happy being a pig and so
the reason that all of this is
is selfish is because by recognizing i'm
a potential problem meaning i stop
myself from achieving my own goals
and that but i can manage that by being
honest about what it is
and saying okay cool here are all the
sort of limitations and difficulties
take gravity
i never try to pretend like it's not
real which has stopped me from falling
off of things which is amazing i'm very
excited about that
and so but they're as sort of cheeky as
that is
there are all these sort of other truths
about the human condition that i
recognize as equally as i recognize that
so
by doing that i have lived a life that
is not
devoid of pain by any stretch of the
imagination but is is
manageable like i'm able to manage
stress i'm able to manage anxiety i'm
able to
avoid depression i was able to change
the financial lot in my life i've been
able to help family members
and so it's like all of these things
that we i would think would want for
anybody the ability to manage your own
internal state if we
if we never went farther than that all
of the things that i do
has allowed me to manage my own sort of
emotional internal state
and that truly if people realize oh [__]
like
i don't have to feel like i'm in this
fragile position which i think a lot of
people live in a place where they're
[__] terrified
and part of that reason is all of their
positions are fragile instead of
nasim toleb's notion of anti-fragile
where they can get stronger
and again i came to these conclusions
because i lived
in a really gnarly emotional place for a
very long time
where i was sliding towards depression i
hated my life and i had no idea how to
make it any better
and it was only reading about the brain
learning about evolution those were the
things that ended up
beginning to pull me out because they
were real and they made the world more
predictable
you know it's fantastic you say this
because i often
get the emails from you
in your chaotic state and that's exactly
what i tell people i mean
learn i mean it sounds so cliche right
knowledge is power
but then i tell them the whole
evolutionary spiel story or people write
to me
and say since i've discovered you and
your evolutionary work
it has given given me a window to life
and so
it's so wonderful that you you put it in
the way that you did because this
because i oft my wife jokes with me she
goes
can you stop writing books that just
educate
people about all the fancy science and
write a how-to
self-help book so that we could live in
a fancy house in southern california
and in a sense i always think to myself
but i thought that i'm already
doing that but in a sense i don't
package it
in the how to here are the seven steps
to
i mean right jordan peterson's book i
mean fine it's a great book whatever
but 12 rules for life what do you mean
you've got the recipe there's 12 of them
and
right so in a sense i'm often amazed
that
people require sort of that level of
specificity
of a call to action for them to view it
as valuable right
to me it's i'm giving you the universal
explanatory key to life
what more do you need for self-help no
you gotta break it down in the way
you're saying so i truly do appreciate
your position it's interesting so here
here's a glimpse into my self-delusion
so because i'm not as smart as i want to
be
i i've really had to grapple with that
and i spent a lot of years
that was one of the primary drivers of
my sort of slide to depression
was man i'm i'm just smart enough to
realize
that i'm not that smart and so i always
felt like i'm sort of clinging on to
this bottom
rung of a level of usable intelligence
because i'm not stupid i i recognize
that
but i always felt like i was clinging on
to sort of this bottom rung where i
could see how much
like smarter people were than me and
that i desired it
intensely and the way that i
i the self-soothing mechanism that i
developed for this was
this is amazing you're just dumb enough
to be able to explain the self-help
angle to people
and just smart enough to learn the
things you need to learn to improve your
own life
and so i've always said instruction
manuals should be written by people who
struggled
to assemble that thing or to do that
thing because they know where the
pitfalls are
and so i've really struggled to
get control of my emotions to build a
life where i felt good about myself when
i'm by myself
and because i struggled with those
things i feel like i can go back and
sort of self-help
um and so because of that i have
the my whole life is about self-help
like everything i think about
either to help myself or to help other
people um
so but i need people that are doing what
you're doing
because i'm not able to discover those
things on my own and certainly not and i
don't think any of us can discover
enough sort of broadly arrayed topics
so the fact that there are people like
you that you know are probably
a little bit higher than me on the
intellectual level
can can put those things together in a
digestible way
and then i'm that sort of next rung down
and i can you know hopefully map it out
for people in a way that's
usable and i give you a few iq points
and you send me some of your money into
my bank account like a fair result
that sounds like a very fair trade
man if you really could buy iq points i
would do it in a heartbeat
you know i and you can't see it right
now but i'm in my study
and there's i have a huge personal
library i've told the story before and
in this huge personal library there are
still at least i don't i lost count but
i
it's probably at least 200 books right
now in this room that i'm in
that i haven't read and i will often
walk into the room
and kind of almost be hit with a about i
mean not of clinical anxiety but of this
kind of dread that there's all this
knowledge in this room
that i don't know and and again this
shows you what epistemic humility is
yes when i know something i walk with
the with the swagger of someone who
knows it
but the reality is i also know how
little i know
because i look around this room and they
are if i read the 200 books in this room
that i still haven't read my god i'm
gonna be more knowledgeable
so in a sense beyond iq there's one of
the things that when graduate students
companies say well you know i really
want to work with you
what are the traits you're looking for i
always tell them it's going to sound
cliche but it's
perfectly true intellectual curiosity
right i mean i get up every morning
and i'm a kid in a candy store why
because later i'm going to talk to tom
and that's going to be exciting then
later i'm going to
write the paper here that's going to be
exciting so i literally live my life
as like an intellectual playground right
and
that allows me to wake up every day with
with no dread
even though of course there's a lot of
pressures and so on but
i'm always playing i'm playing in the
landscape of cerebral pursuits what
could be more beautiful right
i'm with you there man dude i i'm gonna
have to have you back on the show i have
enjoyed this profoundly
researching it was amazing everybody
should definitely read your book the
parasitic mind
i know that pre-ordering matters so i'm
not sure when this comes out i think the
book may already be out oh no we still
have a while
no um october 6th so i don't know if
there's a way for you to maybe
yeah push down because pre-orders really
matter yeah yeah yeah so
hopefully we can help make this a number
one new york times bestseller if that
matters to you
um but uh dude thank you for doing what
you do
uh it is amazing i very much look
forward to having you back on um where
can people find you where can they buy
the book do you want to go to amazon
thank you tom yeah they could go to
amazon uh it's on many different links
in the uk and canada and you they could
go straight to the publisher it's
regnery r-e-g-n-e-r-y ragnary
if they want to follow me on twitter
it's at godzid
i also host the show on both youtube and
on the podcast it's called the sad truth
s-a-a-d
and so there are many ways we can
connect i hope that you will come and
say hello
on social media nice i love it um and as
almost as a reminder to myself i will
say the next time we get together i
definitely want to talk about
um rituals coming-of-age rituals that
that is uh powerful and i'm sad that it
is missing from today's world all right
everybody
this man is amazing you don't have to
agree with everything that he says but
the fact that he has a cajonese to say
it is inspiring enough
um and i also think he has some
tremendous insights if you haven't
already be sure to subscribe and until
next time my friends be
legendary take care
[Music]
what's up impactivist as you guys know
my mission in life
is to provide the no bs instruction
manual for success
and to that end we've launched our
platform impact theory university
our goal with itu is to provide you with
curriculum that will help you take your
career
business or personal development to the
next level so
regardless of your end goal itu is
designed to provide you with
the universal principles and tactics of
success
that will propel you forward so whether
you want to build a fortune 500 company
advance quickly up the ranks at your
company become a more effective parent
or partner or simply
get unstuck there are core principles
that apply
and that's where impact theory
university comes in but to be clear itu
is not
another podcast or conversation with an
influencer you can get all of that for
free right here on our youtube page
instead it is structured education
delivered in a compelling format
and paired with social support and
accountability we offer two tracks
business and mindset regardless of which
track you choose you'll gain
access to a library of all of our
pre-recorded classes as well as
two hours of live teaching per month
where you'll have the opportunity to
engage with me ask questions and meet
others in the community
every class also comes with an
actionable worksheet designed to help
you take the immediate action
that is required to make any new skill
stick and last but
certainly not least as a student
enrolled in itu you'll get access to
an exclusive online community of other
like-minded individuals who will help
you study the content
work through all of your goals and keep
you accountable at all times
itu pricing starts as low as 47 dollars
a month for the mindset track and 97
a month for the business track there's
also a 50 discount if you buy the
whole year up front and additional
discounts if you sign up for both
mindset and business
when you bundle all of the discounts
together the cost drops to
roughly 80 cents a day i think itu
truly is the best content we have ever
made but if you sign up and don't agree
that it's worth say 10 times what you
paid just take advantage of our no
questions asked 30 day
money back guarantee i don't want any of
us to get paid unless we're delivering
disproportionate value so trust of the
refund process will be absolutely hassle
free
and if this sounds like something that
would help you move forward in your life
but you can't afford it we do have a
scholarship program that you can apply
for
that provides free access to those in
need
all right everybody if you want to take
advantage of this and make it
dramatically important in your life
sign up today the link is in the
description or you can go directly to
university.impacttheory.com i look
forward to seeing you on the inside my
friends and until then
be legendary take care we're putting the
world in jeopardy here so
we're putting the world in jeopardy the
process seems to be moving
incredibly rapidly such that
we can have a discussion about whether
or not uh
there's going to be something to salvage
in 2024 or not
um this is an amazing level of danger
that we are putting ourselves and the
world in
you